Announcing Data Prepper 2.3.0 (#1631)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2023-05-25-Announcing-Data-Prepper-2.3.0.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Announcing Data Prepper 2.3.0"
authors:
- dlv

> - kkondaka

Reviewer: I've been following the pattern of putting our names alphabetical ordered by last name.

date: 2023-05-25 21:30:00 -0700
categories:
  - releases

> meta_keywords: Data Prepper 2.3.0

Reviewer: @pajuric , Any suggestions here?

Some things that come to mind are "S3", "tail sampling"

Reviewer 2: `ingestion, observability, log pipelines` might be some good ones.

Reviewer 3: I can take a look at the meta keywords and description. I'll drop them into the request shortly.

Reviewer 3: Looking at keywords. I want to be sure that what we're using is anchored by the text - and we should try to limit it to no more than 3 keywords or phrases. Here's my suggestions:

**meta_keywords:** Data Prepper expressions, tail sampling in Data Prepper, add entries processor
**meta_description:** Learn how Data Prepper 2.3.0 improves the ability to process complex expressions, supports event tagging, and enhances the add entries processor. Download it now.

meta_description: Data Prepper 2.3.0 with enhancements to expressions, event tagging, enhancements to add_entries processor, s3 sink and tail sampling processor
---

Data Prepper 2.3.0 is now available for [download](https://opensearch.org/downloads.html#data-prepper)!

> This release introduces a number of changes that help with Data Prepper’s ability to process complex expressions with functions, arithmetic operations, and string operations.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This release introduces a number of changes that improve Data Prepper’s ability to process complex expressions with functions, arithmetic operations, and string operations.
```

## Enhancements to Data Prepper expressions

> DataPrepper 2.3 supports using functions in expressions. List of functions supported are can be found at https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/blob/main/docs/expression_syntax.md

Reviewer: "Data Prepper" - It needs a space.

> DataPrepper 2.3 supports using functions in expressions. List of functions supported are can be found at https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/blob/main/docs/expression_syntax.md

Reviewer: It may be better to put a link in some text.

Also, can we link to the documentation site instead?

https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/data-prepper/pipelines/expression-syntax/

Perhaps:

```
List of supported functions are available in the [Expression syntax documentation](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/data-prepper/pipelines/expression-syntax/).

> DataPrepper 2.3 supports three types of expressions

Reviewer: "Data Prepper"

> Data Prepper 2.3 supports using functions in expressions. List of supported functions are available in the [Expression syntax documentation](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/data-prepper/pipelines/expression-syntax/).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Data Prepper 2.3 supports using functions in expressions. A list of supported functions is available in the [Expression syntax ](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/data-prepper/pipelines/expression-syntax/) documentation.
```

* Conditional expressions

>     * Conditional expressions evaluate to a result of Boolean type. The expressions can now have functions in them. For example, length(/message) > 20 would evaluate to true if length of the message field in the event is greater than 20 other wise it evaluates to false. 

Reviewer: Use backticks around:

```
`length(/message) > 20`
```

>     * Conditional expressions evaluate to a result of Boolean type. The expressions can now have functions in them. For example, length(/message) > 20 would evaluate to true if length of the message field in the event is greater than 20 other wise it evaluates to false. 

Reviewer: "other wise" -> "otherwise"

>     * Conditional expressions evaluate to a result of Boolean type, and the expressions now can have functions in them. For example, `length(/message) > 20` would evaluate to true if the length of the message field in the event is greater than 20. Otherwise it evaluates to false. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    * Conditional expressions evaluate to a result of Boolean type, and the expressions can now have functions in them. For example, `length(/message) > 20` would evaluate to true if the length of the message field in the event is greater than 20. Otherwise it evaluates to false. 
```

* Arithmetic expressions
    * Arithmetic expressions evaluate to a result of Integer or Float type. The expressions can have simple arithmetic operators like `+,-,*,/` with functions or JSON pointers or literals as operands. For example, the following expression will add the length of message field of type string in the event with the value of event metadata with key `integerField` and subtracts 1 from it

>  `length(/message) + getMetadata("integerField") - 1`

Reviewer: This may be better with triple backticks around this. Similar to lines 39-45 below.

>     * Arithmetic expressions evaluate to a result of integer or float type. The expressions can have simple arithmetic operators like `+,-,*,/` with functions or JSON pointers or literals as operands. For example, the following expression adds the length of message field of string type in the event with the value of event metadata with the key `integerField` and subtracts 1 from it.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    * Arithmetic expressions evaluate to a result of integer or float type. The expressions can have simple arithmetic operators like `+,-,*,/`, with functions, JSON pointers, or literals as operands. For example, the following expression adds the length of message field of string type in the event with the value of event metadata with the key `integerField` and subtracts 1 from it:
```

>     * Arithmetic expressions evaluate to a result of integer or float type. The expressions can have simple arithmetic operators like `+,-,*,/` with functions or JSON pointers or literals as operands. For example, the following expression adds the length of message field of string type in the event with the value of event metadata with the key `integerField` and subtracts 1 from it.

Reviewer 4: The third sentence is a bit difficult to follow because there are so many prepositions, and it's hard to isolate the nouns. I would rephrase for clarity, and should some of the terms be in code font?

* String expressions
    * String expressions evaluate to a result of String type. String concatenation operator is supported in addition to using functions or JSON pointers or literals as operands. For example, the following expression will add the message1 field of type string in the event with message2 field of type string in the event and appends suffix to it.

> `/message1 + /message2 + "suffix"`

Reviewer: Again, three backticks might be nicer.

>     * String expressions evaluate to a result of string type. The string concatenation operator is supported in addition to using functions or JSON pointers or literals as operands. For example, the following expression adds the message1 field of type string in the event with message2 field of type string in the event and appends "suffix" to it.

Reviewer 4: "The string concatenation operator is supported, and it uses functions, JSON pointers, or literals as operands"? Same comment re: the third sentence. It's a little difficult to follow as written.

>     * String expressions evaluate to a result of string type. The string concatenation operator is supported in addition to using functions or JSON pointers or literals as operands. For example, the following expression adds the message1 field of type string in the event with message2 field of type string in the event and appends "suffix" to it.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    * String expressions evaluate to a result of string type. The string concatenation operator is supported in addition to using functions or JSON pointers or literals as operands. For example, the following expression adds the message1 field of type string in the event with message2 field of type string in the event and appends "suffix" to it:
```

> ```/message1 + /message2 + "suffix"```

Reviewer: Putting the backticks on the same line formats differently from having them on different lines. Is this what you want?

Reviewer 6: Wrap this around three ticks on separate lines, similar to line 39.

## Event tagging

> DataPrepper 2.3 supports tagging events while using grok processor. Events can be tagged optionally using the following configuration

Reviewer: "Data Prepper"

> Data Prepper 2.3 supports tagging events while using the `grok` processor. Events can be tagged optionally using the following configuration

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Data Prepper 2.3 supports tagging events while using the `grok` processor. Events can optionally be tagged using the following configuration:
```

```
processor:
   - grok: 
        match:
          message: <pattern>
        tags_on_match_failure: ["grok_match_fail", "another_tag"]
```

> The presence of tags can be checked in conditional expressions in different processors or routing using `hasTags()` function to do conditional ingestion. For example, a conditional expression checking for the presence of tag `grok_match_fail` would be `hasTags("grok_match_fail")`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The presence of tags can be checked in conditional expressions in different processors or routing using the `hasTags()` function to perform conditional ingestion. For example, a conditional expression checking for the presence of tag `grok_match_fail` would be `hasTags("grok_match_fail")`.
```

## Enhancements to `add_entries` processor

> 

Reviewer 4: These headings should ideally be separated by text so that they are not "stacked."

### Expression-based value

> The `add_entries` processor is enhanced to support adding values based on an expression where the return type can be boolean, integer or float, or string. The following example shows an `add_entries` processor configuration with a `value_expression` option:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `add_entries` processor has been enhanced to support adding values based on an expression where the return type can be Boolean, integer or float, or string. The following example shows an `add_entries` processor configuration with a `value_expression` option:
```

```
processor:
   - add_entries:
       entries:
         - key: "request_len"
           value_expression: "length(/request)"
```

> This configuration adds an entry with key `request_len` with value equal to the length of the request field in the key. The value expression can be any of the expressions supported (see [expression syntax](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/blob/main/docs/expression_syntax.md) for more details)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This configuration adds an entry with the key `request_len` with value equal to the length of the request field in the key. The value expression can be any of the expressions supported. See [Supported operators](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/blob/main/docs/expression_syntax.md) for more details.
```

> This configuration adds an entry with the key `request_len` with value equal to the length of the request field in the key. The value expression can be any of the expressions supported. See [Supported operators](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/blob/main/docs/expression_syntax.md) for more details.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This configuration adds an entry with the key `request_len` with a value equal to the length of the request field in the key. The value expression can be any of the expressions supported. See [Supported operators](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/blob/main/docs/expression_syntax.md) for more details.
```

### Setting event metadata keys

> `add_entries` processor can also add entries in the event’s metadata instead of the event itself. And example `add_entries` processor configuration for adding an entry to metadata 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The `add_entries` processor can add entries in the event’s metadata instead of the event itself. The following example shows an `add_entries` processor configuration for adding an entry to metadata: 
```

> The `add_entries` processor can add entries in the event’s metadata instead of the event itself. The following example shows an `add_entries` processor configuration for adding an entry to metadata:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `add_entries` processor can add entries in the event’s metadata instead of in the event itself. The following example shows an `add_entries` processor configuration for adding an entry to metadata:
```

```
processor:
   - add_entries:
       entries:
         - metadata_key: "request_len"
           value_expression: "length(/request)"
```

> This configuration adds an attribute to event metadata with attribute key `request_len` with value equal to the length of the request field in the key. The value can be set using value or format or `value_expression` option of entries field.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This configuration adds an attribute to event metadata with the attribute key `request_len` with value equal to the length of the request field in the key. The value can be set using the value, format, or `value_expression` option of entries field.
```

> ## S3 sink

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Amazon S3 sink
```

> This configuration adds an attribute to event metadata with the attribute key `request_len` with value equal to the length of the request field in the key. The value can be set using the value, format, or `value_expression` option of entries field.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This configuration adds an attribute to event metadata with the attribute key `request_len` with a value equal to the length of the request field in the key. The value can be set using the value, format, or `value_expression` options of the entries field.
```

> Data Prepper now supports saving data to Amazon S3 sinks as ndjson. Amazon S3 is a popular choice for storing large volumes of data reliably and in a cost-effective way.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Data Prepper now supports saving data to Amazon S3 sinks as Newline delimited JSON (ndjson). Amazon S3 is a popular choice for storing large volumes of data reliably and in a cost-effective way.
```

> Ingesting data into S3 offers a lot of possibilities for your data pipelines, including some of the following:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Ingesting data into Amazon S3 offers many possibilities for your data pipelines, including the following:
```

> Data Prepper now supports saving data to Amazon S3 sinks as Newline delimited JSON (ndjson). Amazon S3 is a popular choice for storing large volumes of data reliably and in a cost-effective way.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Data Prepper now supports saving data to Amazon Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3) sinks as Newline delimited JSON (ndjson). Amazon S3 is a popular choice for storing large volumes of data reliably and cost effectively.
```

> * Noisy or uninteresting data can be routed to S3 and not to OpenSearch to reduce load on your OpenSearch cluster. This can also help you save on compute and storage costs.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Noisy or uninteresting data can be routed to Amazon S3 and not to OpenSearch to reduce load on your OpenSearch cluster. This can help you save on compute and storage costs.
```

> * Ingesting data to S3 creates data which you can use for future processing.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Ingesting data to Amazon S3 creates data that you can use for future processing.
```

> * Noisy or uninteresting data can be routed to Amazon S3 and not to OpenSearch to reduce load on your OpenSearch cluster. This can help you save on compute and storage costs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Noisy or uninteresting data can be routed to Amazon S3 and not to OpenSearch in order to reduce load on your OpenSearch cluster. This can help you save on compute and storage costs.
```

> * Ingesting data to Amazon S3 creates data that you can use for future processing.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Ingesting data into Amazon S3 creates data that you can use for future processing.
```

> * Ingesting data to Amazon S3 creates data that you can use for future processing.

Reviewer 4: Ingesting data creates data? Is that accurate?

Reviewer: @kkondaka , Perhaps:

> Ingestion data to Amazon S3 to have normalized data on-hand that you can use for future processing.

## Tail sampling

> Data Prepper 2.3.0 supports tail sampling to limit the number of events that are sent to a sink similar to the tail sampling support provided by open telemetry. More details tail sampling in open telemetry can be found [here](https://opentelemetry.io/blog/2022/tail-sampling/).

Reviewer: "open telemetry" should become "OpenTelemetry" - also as this is the first use of it, perhaps link to https://opentelmetry.io.

```
[OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io)
```

> Data Prepper 2.3.0 supports tail sampling to limit the number of events that are sent to a sink similar to the tail sampling support provided by open telemetry. More details on tail sampling in [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io) can be found [here](https://opentelemetry.io/blog/2022/tail-sampling/).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Data Prepper 2.3.0 supports tail sampling to limit the number of events that are sent to a sink similar to the tail sampling support provided by open telemetry. For details on tail sampling in [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io), see the blog ["Tail Sampling with OpenTelemetry: Why it’s useful, how to do it, and what to consider"](https://opentelemetry.io/blog/2022/tail-sampling/).
```

Reviewer 5: In the first sentence, is the term "open telemetry" being used as a general concept? Or, are we referring to the framework OpenTelemetry?

Author: I guess it is the framework OpenTelemetry. Should I change it to "OpenTelemetry"?

> Data Prepper 2.3.0 supports tail sampling to limit the number of events that are sent to a sink similar to the tail sampling support provided by OpenTelemetry. For details on tail sampling in [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io) see the blog ["Tail Sampling with OpenTelemetry: Why it’s useful, how to do it, and what to consider"](https://opentelemetry.io/blog/2022/tail-sampling/).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Data Prepper 2.3.0 supports tail sampling to limit the number of events that are sent to a sink, similar to the tail sampling support provided by OpenTelemetry. For information about tail sampling in [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io), see the blog post ["Tail Sampling with OpenTelemetry: Why it’s useful, how to do it, and what to consider"](https://opentelemetry.io/blog/2022/tail-sampling/).
```

> Tail processing in Data Prepper is supported as an action to aggregate processor. The events are stored in the aggregate processor beyond the `group_duration` time until no events are received in the last `wait_period` time. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Tail processing in Data Prepper is supported as an action to the `aggregate` processor. The events are stored in the `aggregate` processor beyond the `group_duration` time until no events are received in the last `wait_period` time. 
```

> For example, the following configuration sends all traces with errors to the sink and non-error events are sampled with the user specified `percent` probabilistic sampler. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For example, the following configuration sends all traces with errors to the sink and non-error events are sampled with the user specified `percent` probabilistic sampler: 
```

> For example, the following configuration sends all traces with errors to the sink and non-error events are sampled with the user specified `percent` probabilistic sampler:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For example, the following configuration sends all traces with errors to the sink, and non-error events are sampled with the user-specified `percent` probabilistic sampler:
```

```
trace-normal-pipeline:
  source:
    otel_trace_source:
      ssl: false
  processor:
    - trace_peer_forwarder:
  processor:
    - aggregate:
        identification_keys: ["traceId"]
        action:
          tail_sampler:
            percent: 20
            wait_period: "15s"
            error_condition: "/traceGroupFields/statusCode == 2"
        group_duration: "30s"
 sink:
    - opensearch
         hosts: ["https://opensearch:9200"]
         insecure: true
         username: "admin"
         password: "admin"
         index: sampled-traces

```

## Getting started

* To download Data Prepper, see the [OpenSearch downloads](https://opensearch.org/downloads.html) page.

> * For instructions on how to get started with Data Prepper, see [Getting started with Data Prepper](https://opensearch.org/docs/2.6/data-prepper/getting-started/).

Reviewer 5: Should we link to the latest Data Prepper getting started page? https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/data-prepper/getting-started/

> * To learn more about the work in progress for Data Prepper 2.3, see the [Data Prepper roadmap](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/projects/1).

Reviewer 4: Do we mean 2.3 here or the next version?

Reviewer: This should be 2.4.

## Thanks to our contributors!

> The following people contributed to this release. Thank you!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following community members contributed to this release. Thank you!
```

---
layout: post
title:  "Announcing Data Prepper 2.3.0"
authors:
- kkondaka
- dlv
date: 2023-06-06 10:00:00 -0700
categories:
  - releases
meta_keywords: Data Prepper 2.3.0, ingestion, observability, log pipelines
meta_description: Data Prepper 2.3.0 with enhancements to expressions, event tagging, enhancements to add_entries processor, s3 sink and tail sampling processor
---

Data Prepper 2.3.0 is now available for [download](https://opensearch.org/downloads.html#data-prepper)!
This release introduces a number of changes that improve Data Prepper’s ability to process complex expressions with functions, arithmetic operations, and string operations.

## Enhancements to Data Prepper expressions

Data Prepper 2.3 supports using functions in expressions. A list of supported functions is available in the [Expression syntax](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/data-prepper/pipelines/expression-syntax/) documentation.

> Data Prepper 2.3 supports three types of expressions:

Reviewer 6: I would shift the formatting of these sections to be h3 level headings. This way, we can add definitions underneath each section heading, and we don't have to format whose definition under an unordered list. I added suggestions that accomplish that.

* Conditional expressions
    * Conditional expressions evaluate to a result of Boolean type, and the expressions can now have functions in them. For example, `length(/message) > 20` would evaluate to true if the length of the message field in the event is greater than 20. Otherwise it evaluates to false.
* Arithmetic expressions
    * Arithmetic expressions evaluate to a result of integer or float type. The expressions can have simple arithmetic operators like `+,-,*,/`, with functions, JSON pointers, or literals as operands. For example, the following expression adds the length of `message` field in the event with the value of `integerField` in the event metadata and subtracts 1 from it.

>  ```length(/message) + getMetadata("integerField") - 1```

Reviewer 6: Wrap this around three ticks on separate lines, similar to line 39.

* String expressions

>     * String expressions evaluate to a result of string type. The string concatenation operator is supported, and it uses functions, JSON pointers, or literals as operands. For example, the following expression concatenates the `message1` field of type string in the event with the `message2` field in the event and appends "suffix" to it:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion

```

```

### String expressions

String expressions evaluate to a result of string type. The string concatenation operator is supported, and it uses functions, JSON pointers, or literals as operands. For example, the following expression concatenates the `message1` field of type string in the event with the `message2` field in the event and appends "suffix" to it:

```
/message1 + /message2 + "suffix"
```

## Event tagging

Data Prepper 2.3 supports tagging events while using the `grok` processor. Events can be tagged optionally be tagged using the following configuration:

```
processor:
   - grok:
        match:
          message: <pattern>
        tags_on_match_failure: ["grok_match_fail", "another_tag"]
```

The presence of tags can be checked in conditional expressions in different processors or routing using the `hasTags()` function to perform conditional ingestion. For example, a conditional expression checking for the presence of tag `grok_match_fail` would be `hasTags("grok_match_fail")`.

## Enhancements to `add_entries` processor

The `add_entries` processor has been enhanced to support values with expressions and to set event metadata keys.

### Expression-based value

> The `add_entries` processor has been enhanced to support adding values based on an expression where the return type can be Boolean, integer or float, or string. The following example shows an `add_entries` processor configuration with a `value_expression` option:

Reviewer 3: Consider linking add entries processor to here: https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/data-prepper/pipelines/configuration/processors/add-entries/
